[spec] Specify object lifecycle and related operations (#118)
single-cell-data/SOMA: abstract_specification.md

- as a container of independent objects (e.g., a collection of single-cell datasets, each manifest as a [SOMAExperiment](#soma-experiment) object)
- as the basis for building other composed types (e.g., using SOMACollection to organize pre-defined fields in [SOMAExperiment](#soma-experiment) such as multiple layers of `X`).

#### Collection entry URIs

Collections refer to their components by URI.
A collection may store its reference to an element by **absolute** URI or **relative** URI.

A reference to an **absolute** URI is, as the name implies, absolute.
When the backing storage of the collection itself is moved, absolute URI references do not change.

A collection can also refer to sub-paths of itself by **relative** URI.

> If the entire directory storing a collection and a child referred to by relative URI is moved, the relative URI references now refer to the changed base URI.

Reviewer: you might add some wording here that points out that "relative" is an attribute of the particular storage system, eg. S3 really doesn't have directories, but has path prefixes that serve the same purpose.  TileDB-Cloud shows another bunch of special cases if I understand it right.

So I would point out that relative is optional.

And I would reword this to something like:    Where relative URIs are supported by the storage system, collections referencing children by a relative URI will always resolve the child with respect to the parent (base) URI.  For example, on a Posix file system, if the entire directory storing a collection .... <same as you have>

Author: Added some description of this, along with language indicating that we treat “fake” hierarchies just like normal hierarchies.

A collection can also refer to sub-paths of itself by **relative** URI.
This means that the collection's elements are stored as suffixes of the collection's path; for instance for a collection at `backend://host/dataset`, the name `child` would refer to `backend://host/dataset/child`.
This applies both to truly hierarchical systems (like POSIX filesystems) and systems that are technically non-hierarchical but can emulate a hierarchical namespace, like Amazon S3 or Google Cloud Storage.
If the entire directory storing a collection and a child referred to by relative URI is moved, the relative URI references now refer to the changed base URI.
While the term "relative" is used, only **child** URIs are supported as relative URIs; relative paths like `../sibling-path/sub-entry` are not supported.

Consider a directory tree of a SOMA implementation that uses a file named `.collection-info` to store the URIs of the collection's contents:

- `file:///soma-dataset`
  - `collection`
    - `.collection-info`
      - `absolute`: `file:///soma-dataset/collection/abspath`
      - `external-absolute`: `file:///soma-dataset/more-data/other-data`

>       - `relative`: `relpath`

Author: Updated to represent `.collection-info` as a real file and present its contents differently from other paths.

> ℹ️ **Note** - this section is just a sketch, and is primarily focused on defining abstract primitive operations that must exist on each type.

## Object lifecycle

SOMA object instances have a lifecycle analogous to the lifecycle of OS-level file objects.
A SOMA object is instantiated by **opening** a provided URI, in one of _read_ (`r`) or _write_ (`w`) mode.
The opened object can be manipulated (pursuant to its open state) until it is **closed**, at which point any further calls which attempt to access or modifying backing data will fail (again, akin to a file object).

SOMA objects are open for **exclusively** reading or writing.
When a SOMA object is open for writing, only metadata, the schema, and information directly derived from the schema may be read.
Additionally, for Collection objects, the members of the collection are also accessible when the collection is open in write mode.
For example:

```
writable_collection = soma_impl.open('file:///some/collection', 'w')
dataframe = writable_collection['dataframe']  # OK
dataframe.schema  # OK

> dataframe.read(...)  # This is NOT allowed and will cause an error.

Reviewer: For clarity, our internal specs tend to always use the [RFC2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt) standard (i.e., consistently use `NOT`), but given that this doc has not already adopted it, that is probably an aspirational change.

> dataframe.read(...)  # This is NOT allowed and will cause an error.

Author: an author [OUGHT TO](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6919#section-4) use the caps consistently

> dataframe.read(...)  # This is NOT allowed and will cause an error.

Reviewer 2: @bkmartinjr TIL about RFC2119! :) 

If we want to go that route, sure.

> dataframe.read(...)  # This is NOT allowed and will cause an error.

Reviewer: there are very good reasons for it - which is why the IETF uses it (as does many other orgs like W3C).  It is a future decision which should not hold up this PR -- but coincidentally the topic was it was just raised inside CZI (regarding this very doc being unclear).  

[Here is](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/main/schema/3.0.0/schema.md) an example of one of our specs that strongly benefits from it.

> dataframe.read(...)  # This is NOT allowed and will cause an error.

Reviewer 2: I filed #122 -- this is awesome info -- thanks @bkmartinjr !! :)

The common SOMA lifecycle operations are as follows:

| Operation                      | Description                                                                                                  |
| ------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| static open(string uri, ...)   | Opens the SOMA object (of the type it is attached to).                                                       |
| static create(string uri, ...) | Creates a new SOMA object (of the given type) at the given URI, and returns that object, opened for writing. |
| close()                        | Closes the SOMA object, flushing all unsaved data.                                                           |

The exact mechanism by which these "static" methods are exposed may vary by language.
For instance, in Python, `@classmethod`s are used, while in a language without class methods, the methods can be implemented as global-level functions:

```python
class Collection:
    @classmethod
    def open(cls, uri, ...): ...
```

```
soma_collection_t soma_collection_create(char *uri, ...) { ... }
```

> Where possible, the lifecycle should be integrated into language-specific resource management frameworks (e.g. context management with `with` in Python, try-with-resources in Java).

Reviewer 2: I continue to disagree but won't block the PR.

| set(string key, ValueType value)        | Set the key/value in the collection.                                                     |
| del(string key)                         | Remove the key/value from the collection. Does not delete the underlying object (value). |
| add_new_collection(string key, ...)     | Creates a new sub-Collection and adds it to this Collection.                             |
| add_new_dataframe(string key, ...)      | Creates a new DataFrame and adds it to this Collection.                                  |
| add_new_dense_ndarray(string key, ...)  | Creates a new DenseNDArray and adds it to this Collection.                               |
| add_new_sparse_ndarray(string key, ...) | Creates a new SparseNDArray and adds it to this Collection.                              |

A SOMA collection also manages the lifecycle of objects directly instantiated by it.
Objects accessed via getting a Collection element, or objects created with one of the <code>add*new*<var>object_type</var></code> methods are considered "owned" by the collection.

> This allows all the objects to be automatically closed together by [the collection's close operation](#operation-close-collection-types).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All such objects will be automatically closed together by [the collection's close operation](#operation-close-collection-types).
```

Author: This is good.

### Operation: create() (Collection types)

Create a new SOMACollection of the given type with the user-specified URI.
The collection type created should match the collection type it is called upon; for example `SOMAExperiment.create` should create a `SOMAExperiment`.
This `create` function has no parameters beyond those shared by all `create` methods.

```
SOMACollectionType.create(string uri, platform_config, context) -> SOMACollectionType
```

Parameters:

- uri - location at which to create the object.
- [platform_config](#platform-specific-configuration) - optional storage-engine specific configuration
- [context](#long-lived-context-data) - optional context to use for this new object.

### Operation: close (Collection types)

In addition to the details of the [common close operation](#operation-close), there are some semantics specific to collection types.

When a SOMA collection is directly used to instantiate child SOMA objects, those SOMA objects are considered "owned" by the collection, and the collection manages their lifecycle.
When the collection is closed, it must close any of these child objects before closing itself.
For example:

```

> root = soma_impl.open('path://netloc/root/collection', 'w')

Reviewer: we should eventually move to an IDL-like definition if we want the spec to be durable.  But as John says, that is future work, not immediately needed (IMHO)

- The remaining parameters are passed directly to the respective type's `create` static method, except for `context`, which is always set to the current collection's context.

`add_new_collection` has an extra parameter allowing control over the type of collection added:

```
add_new_collection(string key, CollectionType type, string uri = "", PlatformConfig platform_config) -> SOMACollection
```

- type: The type of collection to add. For instance, if `SOMAExperiment` is provided, the newly-added collection, and the returned instance, will be a `SOMAExperiment`.

## SOMADataFrame

> ⚠️ **To be further specified** -- all methods need specification.
>
> Summary of operations:

| Operation                                | Description                                        |
| ---------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |

> | static create(uri, ...) -> SOMADataFrame | Create a SOMADataFrame.                            |

Reviewer 2: ditto re end w/ period or not

| set(string key, SOMAObject value, use_relative_uri) | Set the key/value in the collection.                                                     |
| del(string key)                                     | Remove the key/value from the collection. Does not delete the underlying object (value). |
| add_new_collection(string key, ...)                 | Creates a new sub-Collection and adds it to this Collection.                             |
| add_new_dataframe(string key, ...)                  | Creates a new DataFrame and adds it to this Collection.                                  |
| add_new_dense_ndarray(string key, ...)              | Creates a new DenseNDArray and adds it to this Collection.                               |
| add_new_sparse_ndarray(string key, ...)             | Creates a new SparseNDArray and adds it to this Collection.                              |

A SOMA collection also manages the lifecycle of objects directly instantiated by it.
Objects accessed via getting a Collection element, or objects created with one of the <code>add_new\_<var>object_type</var></code> methods are considered "owned" by the collection.

> All such objects will be automatically closed together by [the collection's close operation](#operation-close-collection-types).

Reviewer 4: Also worth mentioning they inherit the parent's context? Or do we consider that implementation-specific?

# new_child was created by root and thus is also owned by root.

external_object = soma_impl.open('path://other/data')
# external_object was created independently and thus has no owner.
root['other_key'] = external_object
# Even though external_object has been set as an element of root,
# the instance `external_object` was not itself created by root
# and is thus still not owned by root.

root.close()
# Root will close its members, which will in turn recursively close theirs.
# The exact order may vary but will still reflect the ownership tree:
#  1. root is asked to close.
#      2. root asks child_a to close.
#          3. child_a asks grandchild to close.
#              4. grandchild closes itself.
#          5. child_a closes itself.
#      6. root asks new_child to close.
#          7. new_child closes itself.
#      8. root closes itself.
#
# external_object remains open because it is not owned by root.
```

A user may close a child object before closing the parent object.
Because `close` is idempotent, this is explicitly allowed.
Closing the child will _not_ otherwise affect the parent object; it will remain open as usual.

### Operation: set

> Adds an entry to the collection, overwriting an existing key if one exists already.

Reviewer 4: Does the spec have an opinion on what happens to data originally stored by the object that is replaced at a specified key? Is it orphaned or removed?

```
set(string key, SOMAObject value, URIType uri_type)
```

Parameters:

- key - The key to set.
- value - The value to set the key to. If a user sets a collection entry to a type inconsistent with the type of that key (e.g. a defined key in an Experiment) or with the general type of the collection (e.g. a collection of Measurements), behavior is unspecified. Implementations are encouraged to raise an error if possible, to prevent latent errors when later attempting to use the data.
- uri_type - How the collection should refer to the URI of the newly-added element, whether by absolute or relative URI. The default is `auto`, which will use a relative URI if possible but otherwise use an absolute URI. If `absolute`, the entry will always use an absolute URI. If `relative`, the entry will always use a relative URI, and an error will be raised if a relative URI cannot be used.

### Operation: add_new\_<var>object_type</var>

> Each <code>add_new\_<var>object_type</var></code> method creates a new SOMA dataset in storage, adds it to the collection, and returns it to the user. The newly-created entry has the same `context` value as the existing collection and is [owned by the current collection](#operation-close-collection-types).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Each <code>add_new\_<var>object_type</var></code> method creates a new SOMA dataset in storage, adds it to the collection (with the same semantics as the `create` operation), and returns it to the user. The newly-created entry has the same `context` value as the existing collection and is [owned by the current collection](#operation-close-collection-types).
```

```
add_new_dataframe(string key, string uri = "", ...) -> SOMADataFrame
add_new_dense_ndarray(string key, string uri = "", ...) -> SOMADenseNDArray
add_new_sparse_ndarray(string key, string uri = "", ...) -> SOMASparseNDArray
```

Parameters:

- key: The key to add the new element at. This cannot already be a key of the collection.

> - uri: An optional parameter to specify a URI to create the new collection, which may be [relative or absolute](#collection-entry-uris). If the URI is relative, the new entry will be added with that relative URI. If the URI is absolute, the new entry will be added with that absolute URI. If a collection already exists at the user-provided URI, the operation should fail. If the user does not specify a URI, the collection will generate a new URI for the entry. When possible, this should be a relative URI based on a sanitized version of the key.

Reviewer 4: Do this need to mention that relative URIs cannot be "multi-level"? I think that's what the spec mentions above.

- The remaining parameters are passed directly to the respective type's `create` static method, except for `context`, which is always set to the current collection's context.

`add_new_collection` has an extra parameter allowing control over the type of collection added:

```

> add_new_collection(string key, CollectionType type, string uri = "", PlatformConfig platform_config) -> SOMACollection

Reviewer 4: Completely out-of-scope for this PR, but I'm now just wondering why we didn't consider having explicit methods for the various types of collections? `add_new_experiment`, `add_new_measurement`, `add_new_collection`.

```

- type: The type of collection to add. For instance, if `SOMAExperiment` is provided, the newly-added collection, and the returned instance, will be a `SOMAExperiment`.

## SOMADataFrame

> ⚠️ **To be further specified** -- all methods need specification.
>
> Summary of operations:

| Operation                                | Description                                         |
| ---------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| static create(uri, ...) -> SOMADataFrame | Create a SOMADataFrame.                             |
| get soma_type                            | Returns the constant "SOMADataFrame".               |
| get schema -> Arrow.Schema               | Return data schema, in the form of an Arrow Schema. |
| get index_column_names -> [string, ...]  | Return index (dimension) column names.              |
| get count -> int                         | Return the number of rows in the SOMADataFrame.     |

> | read                                     | Read a subset of data from the SOMADataFrame.       |

Reviewer 4: `Read a subset of data iteratively from the SOMADataFrame`?  Whether or not one is reading a subset, the iterative nature of reads seems like a core part of the design, even at the spec level, given the returns type for DataFrame.read (and SparseNDArray.read())

While most people bothering to read a spec like this will understand that a subset includes the whole set, do we want to rely upon reader knowing that? "Read all or a subset..."

| -------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| static create(uri, ...) -> SOMASparseNDArray | Create a SOMASparseNDArray named with the URI.                          |
| get soma_type                                | Returns the constant "SOMASparseNDArray".                               |
| get shape -> (int, ...)                      | Return length of each dimension, always a list of length `ndim`.        |
| get ndim -> int                              | Return number of dimensions.                                            |
| get schema -> Arrow.Schema                   | Return data schema, in the form of an Arrow Schema.                     |
| get is_sparse -> True                        | Return the constant True.                                               |
| get nnz -> uint                              | Return the number stored values in the array, including explicit zeros. |
| read                                         | Read a slice of data from the SOMASparseNDArray.                        |

> | write                                        | Write a slice of data to the SOMASparseNDArray.                         |

Reviewer 4: important to use `slice` here instead of `subset` as we do above? If it's a technical term we explicitly want, ok.

Summary:

```

> open(string uri, ...) -> SOMA object      # identify a SOMA object and open it

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
open(string uri, ...) -> SOMAObject      # identify a SOMA object and open it
```
?
